---
layout: post
title: "Week #2: Sex determination"
number: 2
---

Something about moving this email out of your "Promotions" tab?

__Paper:__ [_Sex Determination: Why So Many Ways of Doing It?_](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.1001899), by Doris Bachtrog et al. (_PLoS biology_, 2014) [[pdf]](http://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/article/file?id=10.1371/journal.pbio.1001899&type=printable).

This week's paper is about sex determination, or how different species go about determining whether an individual ends up male, female, or otherwise. (It turns out the "otherwise" category is more common than you might think.) Because this is a scientific essay and not a research article, it's actually pretty readable and covers a lot of ground.

Below, for the sake of clarity, when I say the word "sex" you can assume I'm referring to male, female, etc. If I ever mean the sexy kind of sex, I'll call that ~sex~.

__Why do we have sex(es)?__

I actually got all the way through this review paper before I even thought to ask a very basic question: Why do we even _have_ different sexes?

From an evolutionary perspective, the sort of throw-away answer to why organisms have ~sex~ with other individuals is that it promotes genetic diversity; by swapping genetic material, mutating, etc., our offspring have a chance to get the best of both worlds, so to speak.

But having ~sex~ doesn't necessarily imply that we should have different _sexes_, does it? Hermaphrodites, which have both male and female sex organs, can have sex with themselves _and_ other organisms. (94% of plants are hermaphrodites, by the way, while only 5% of animals are.) So why should we have two sexes?

Well, reproducing with yourself is a lot easier, but species who have to find other mates to reproduce might be able to adapt to their environment more quickly. Because separate sexes have evolved independently in so many different species, there must be a cost to [self-breeding](https://www.nature.com/articles/336435a0). One hypothesis about the function of having multiple sexes, then, is that it prevents an organism from having sex with _itself_ (or reproducing with itself, at least). Let's say you're a little multicellular organism, and you're ready to make little multicellular offspring. If your genitals are incompatible with themselves, then you can't just have ~sex~ with yourself, so you'll have to seek out another multicellular organism with genitals compatible with yours in order to reproduce. So it turns out that you only need two different sexes in order to ensure that no organism can reproduce with itself.

And in case you're wondering how scientists can look at a fungus or yeast and say "Oh yeah, this one's male," it turns out this all comes down to their gametes being [different sizes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anisogamy). For example, sperm are smaller than eggs, so sperm-makers are called males and egg-droppers are called females. In some species, there are clearly different sexes, but the gametes are the same size. In that case, we just call them "+" or "-". (Not very catchy names.)

__Sex determination myths__

Okay, on to the paper. When you think about different species, you might assume that most species are either male or female. You probably also assume that, as with humans, the question of male vs. female has something to do with the X and Y chromsomes. The main point of this paper, however, is that a lot of our understanding about how sex determination works is not true or even common once you start considering species other than placental mammals and fruit flies. Because of this, our understanding of the evolution of sex determination is quite limited.

In this paper, the authors focus on dispelling three key "myths" of sex determination:

1. Sex is typically determined by X and Y chromosomes
2. Sex is controlled by one master-switch gene
3. Sex chromosome differentiation and degeneration is inevitable

(I didn't know about those last two points, but I guess now I know they're myths.)

In all placental mammals, only one chromosome pair is sex-determining. In females, the chromosome pair is XX, while in males it's XY. In fact, it's only a tiny portion of the Y chromosome, a "master-switch" gene called [Sry](https://www.nature.com/articles/364713a0), that leads to development as a male.

However, this isn't at all the norm, because sex-determination has evolved independently in so many different species. For example, in birds and some insects, fish, and reptiles, it's the male who has a matching chromosome pair (called ZZ), while females are (ZW).

But in many species, sex-determination isn't set off by genetics at all, but by the environment.

__A non-exhaustive list of bizarre sex-determination mechanisms:__

- [Green spoonworms](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bonellia_viridis) become females, unless they come into contact with a female when they are larvae, at which point they develop into tiny males that live inside the female
- Some insects [eliminate their father's genome](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pseudo-arrhenotoky) after fertilization
- In some arthropods (e.g., some spiders, roly polies), [sex is controlled by parasites](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15138452) that transform males into females
- In all crocodiles, most turtles, and some fish, the sex of an individual is [determined by temperature](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK9989/) (e.g., the temperature of the eggs)

There are so many more interesting things mentioned in this paper that I don't have time to get into. Overall, this paper does a really great job of making the case that, if we only study sex determination in organisms such as mammals and fruit flies, we're probably going to miss some things. In many species, the mechanisms that determine sex evolve rapidly, and finding good model organisms for these cases is going to be key for finding out more about the evolutionary fitness of being male, female, or something else entirely.

__Summary__:

- _Subject_: Even though many species have two different sexes of individuals, the mechanisms that determine sex are varied and evolve rapidly
- _Key observation_: Our understanding of sex determination based on a few model organisms masks the diversity apparent across species as a whole
- _Conclusion_: Using genomics and different model organisms will enable a better understanding of how and why different sexes evolve

__Related reading__:

- Some fish have three genders: [[pdf, page 8]](http://labs.eeb.utoronto.ca/gross/Gross1984a.pdf)
- [Bateman's principle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bateman%27s_principle): how having gametes of different sizes leads to differences between males and females
- [The evolution of sexual cannabilism](http://ib.berkeley.edu/courses/ib160/past_papers/suttle.html)
- Richard Dawkins's _The Extended Phenotype_: ["sex-linked outlaws"](https://books.google.com/books?id=kOvmDAAAQBAJ&lpg=PA440&ots=1FnD4BRibX&dq=extended%20phenotype%20male%20female%20sex&pg=PA211#v=onepage&q=%22sex-linked%20outlaws%22&f=false) from Chapter 8

_Bonus note_: If you ever want to read an academic paper for free, find the article's doi, and enter it at [sci-hub.tw](http://sci-hub.tw/).

__Coming up next week:__ TBD
