---
layout: post
title: "Week #2: Sex"
number: 2
---

Something about moving this email out of your "Promotions" tab?

__Paper:__ [_Sex Determination: Why So Many Ways of Doing It?_](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.1001899), by Doris Bachtrog et al. (PLOS Bio, 2014) [[pdf]](http://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/article/file?id=10.1371/journal.pbio.1001899&type=printable).

This week's paper is about sex determination. In other words, how do different species go about determining whether an individual ends up male, female, or otherwise? (It turns out the "otherwise" category is more common than you might think.) Because this is a scientific essay and not a research article, it's actually pretty readable. It also covers a lot of ground, so I'm just going to highlight the parts I found most interesting.

__Sex determination myths__

In a majority of species, the sex of an individual is determined by its sex chromosomes, such as the X and Y chromosomes that you're probably already familiar with. The main point of this paper, however, is that beyond this basic assumption, a lot of our ideas about how sex determination works are not true once you start considering species other than placental mammals.

The authors focus on dispelling three key "myths" of sex determination:

1. Sex is typically determined by X and Y chromosomes

2. Sex is controlled by one master-switch gene

3. Sex chromosome differentiation and degeneration is inevitable

__Why do we have sex(es)?__

First off, just for the sake of clarity, if I ever mean the sexy kind of sex, I'll call that ~sex~. Otherwise, you can assume I'm talking about the other kind of sex--that is, male/female/etc.

I got all the way through this review paper before I even thought to ask about why we even have different sexes. The sort of throw-away response to why we have ~sex~ is that it promotes genetic diversity, so that our offspring will have a chance to get the best of both worlds, so to speak, in terms genetic material. But having ~sex~ doesn't necessarily imply that we should have _sexes_, does it? Well, I think a better way to think about the function of multiple sexes is that it actually prevents an organism from having sex with _itself_. Let's say you're a little multicellular organism, and you're ready to make little multicellular offspring. If your genitals are incompatible with themselves, so that you can't just have ~sex~ with yourself, you'll have to seek out another multicellular organism with genitals compatible with yours in order to reproduce. So it turns out that you only need two different sexes in order to ensure that no organism can have ~sex~ with itself.

On the other hand, there is a "cost" of sex, in that now only half of your species can bear young.

From Wikipedia: "The two-fold cost of sex may be compensated for in some species in many ways. Females may eat males after mating..."

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Evolution_of_sexual_reproduction#Two-fold_cost_of_sex

## How many sexes are there?

What would it mean to have more than two sexes?

More than two genders? Tons.

https://www.quora.com/Why-isnt-there-a-third-or-more-gender-in-nature-Is-that-a-possibility

Salmon, jacks, etc.

__Summary__:

- _Subject_: Even though many species have two different sexes of individuals, the mechanisms that determine sex are varied and evolve rapidly
- _Why we care_: Sex is universal, but we don't fully understand its evolution or its benefits
- _Key observation_: Our understanding of sex determination based on a few model organisms masks the diversity apparent across species as a whole
- _Conclusion_: Using genomics and different model organisms will enable a better understanding of how and why different sexes evolve

__Bonus round__

- recognizing sex of different birds

__Related reading__:

- etc.

__Coming up next week:__ TBD
